layout: post
title: PThread (POSIX Thread)
date: 2013-6-27
categories: Linux
---

All threads share the same global memory, including:

- data segment: initialized data and uninitialized data(BSS)
- heap segment

But per-thread statks not shared.

On Linux, threads are implemented using `clone()`, and its ten times faster than `fork()`. Even though `fork()` has COW mechanism, thread do not need copy many of the attributes such as page tables.(线程是调度的基本单位，进程是资源分配的基本单位)


Two main POSIX Threading implementations on Linux:

- Linux Threads
- Native POSIX Threads Library (NPTL)

### 1. `errno`

On Linux, each thread has their own `errno` value.
The traditional method of returning status from system calls and some library functions is to return 0 on success and –1 on error, with `errno` being set to indicate the error.
But all Pthreads functions return 0 on success and return position value on failure. The failure value is same as `errno` and can be placed in `errno` by traditional UNIX system call.

### 2. compile

Use `-pthread` flags for gcc. The effects of this option including following:

- `_REENTRANT` preprocessor macro is defined. This causes the declarations of a few reentrant functions to be exposed.
- The program is linked with the **libpthread** library (the equivalent of `–lpthread` ).

### 3. Thread Control

- pthread_create
- pthread_exit
- pthread_self
- pthread_equal
- pthread_join
- pthread_detach

### 4. synchronize

##### 4.1 mutex (mutual exclusion)

A mutex is a variable of the type `pthread_mutex_t`.

- statically initialize: `pthread_mutex_t mtx = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER`;
- dynamically initialize: `pthread_mutex_t mtx = pthread_mutex_init()`;
  - `PTHREAD_MUTEX_DEFAULT`/NULL: same as `PTHREAD_MUTEX_NORMAL` on Linux
  - `PTHREAD_MUTEX_NORMAL`: may cause deadlock
  - `PTHREAD_MUTEX_ERRORCHECK`: check deadlock
  - `PTHREAD_MUTEX_RECURSIVE`: has lock count
- locking a mutex: `int pthread_mutex_lock(pthread_mutex_t *mutex);`
  - `pthread_mutex_trylock()`
  - `pthread_mutex_timedlock()`
- unlocking a mutex: `int pthread_mutex_unlock(pthread_mutex_t *mutex);`
- destroy a mutex: `pthread_mutex_destroy()`, only for non-static mutex

If a thread lock the mutex that it has locked by thread self again, may result: the thread  deadlocks, blocked trying to lock a mutex that it already owns, or the call fails, returning the error EDEADLK. On Linux, the thread deadlocks by default.（lock不可重入?）

mutex locking is advisory, rather than mandatory(和Linux下文件锁机制相同).

Some performance data:

- without mutexes: 0.35s
- with mutexes: 3.1s
- with file lock: 22s
- with System V semaphore: 14s

On Linux, mutexes are implemented using `futexes` (an acronym derived from fast user space mutexes ), and lock contentions are dealt with using the `futex()`  system call.

To avoid deadlock, when threads can lock the same set of mutexes, they should always lock them in the same order.

##### 4.1.1 POSIX semaphores versus Pthreads mutexes

POSIX semaphores and Pthreads mutexes can both be used to synchronize the actions of threads within the same process, and their performance is similar. How-ever, mutexes are usually preferable, beca use the ownership property of mutexes enforces good structuring of code (only  the thread that locks a mutex can unlock it). By contrast, one thread can increment a semaphore that was decremented by another thread. This flexibility can lead to  poorly structured sy nchronization designs. (For this reason, semaphores are sometime s referred to as the “gotos” of concurrent programming.)

There is one circumstance in which mutexes can’t be used in a multithreaded application and semaphores may therefore be preferable. Because it is async-signal-safe (see Table 21-1, on page 426), the sem_post() function can be used from within a signal handler to synchronize with another thread. This is not possible with mutexes, because the Pthreads functions for operating on mutexes are not async-signal-safe. However, because it is usually preferable to deal with asynchronous sig-nals by accepting them using  sigwaitinfo() (or similar), rather than using signal han-dlers (see Section 33.2.4), this advantage of semaphores over mutexes is seldom required.

##### 4.2 condition variable

A condition variable allows one thread to inform other threads about changes in the state of a shared variable (or other shared resource) and allows the other threads to wait (block) for such notification.

The principal condition variable operations are signal and wait. The signal opera-tion is a notification to one or more waiting threads that a shared variable’s state has changed. The wait operation is the means of blocking until such a notification is received.

A condition variable has the type `pthread_cond_t`.

- statically initialize: `pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;`
- dynamically initialize: `pthread_cond_t cond = pthread_cond_init();`
- singal:
  - `pthread_cond_signal()`: signal used to indicate source availability
  - `pthread_cond_broadcast()`: broadcast used to indicate state change
- wait:
  - `pthread_cond_wait()`
  - `pthread_cond_timedwait()`
- destroy: `pthread_cond_destroy()`, only for non-static cond
  
The wait function do these steps(一定先释放lock):

1. unlock the mutex specified by mutex;
2. block the calling thread until another thread signals the condition variablecond ;
3. relock  mutex.

##### 4.2.1 Spurious wakeup problem

**Spurious wakeup** is that a thread might be awoken from its waiting state even though no thread signaled the condition variable[^SWP]. 
Because spurious wakeup can happen repeatedly,  this problem can be solved by waiting inside a loop that terminates when the condition is true:

```
pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;

// wait thread 
while(...check wait object..) {
	pthread_cond_wait(&cond);
}

// signal thread
...set wait object...
pthread_cond_signal(&cond);
```

### Reference

- The Linux Programming Interface, C29-C30
[^SWP]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spurious_wakeup


